Reword and add uniformity to Standard Library documentation (#4464)
edgedb/edgedb: docs/stdlib/datetime.rst

.. _ref_std_datetime_intro:

> EdgeDB has two varieties of date/time constructs:

Reviewer: This feels like the issue of using "set" outside the context of a proper set. If we say "two types" here, my fear is that a reader will assume EdgeDB has two types that can be used for datetime values. Then, we are showing them four types (`datetime`, `local_datetime`, `local_date`, and `local_time`) spread across two... not sure what to call them. Paradigms?

Is there another word that would work better, or should we say we have four types? I'm reluctant to say we have four types unless we split down to four bullet points... but the point is really just the separation between timezone-aware and local so I'm not sure that makes sense. On the other hand, I'm reluctant to say two "types" because there are four literal types.

I'll try to come up with something that will work, but I'm happy to hear suggestions.

> EdgeDB has two varieties of date/time constructs:

Reviewer: What do you think of this to get around the issue I described?

```rest
EdgeDB offers two ways of representing date/time values:
```

> In EdgeDB, there are two types of date/time constructs:

Reviewer: I think I prefer the original here since it's in active voice. I'd also lean toward "types" over "constructs" even though I believe both are accurate, but the constructs map to actual types which feels like the more relevant info in this context.

> In EdgeDB, there are two types of date/time constructs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EdgeDB has two varieties of date/time constructs:
```

"types" -> "varieties" to avoid confusion around actual types.

* a timezone-aware :eql:type:`std::datetime` type;

* a set of "local" date/time types, not attached to any particular

>   timezone, such as :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  timezone: :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime`, :eql:type:`cal::local_date`, and
```

I believe this is an exhaustive list. "such as" implies these are examples plucked from a larger list.

>   :eql:type:`cal::local_date` and :eql:type:`cal::local_time`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :eql:type:`cal::local_time`.
```

There are two different ways of measuring duration:

* :eql:type:`duration` for using absolute and unambiguous units;

* :eql:type:`cal::relative_duration` for using fuzzy units like years,
  months and days in addition to absolute units.

> All referrable operators, functions and type casts are designed to maintain a

Reviewer: What do you mean by "referrable operators" here? I'd like to use more accessible language if we can. Want to be sure I understand your meaning before I suggest something.

Preliminary suggestion:
```suggestion
All related operators, functions, and type casts are designed to maintain a
```

Author: "Referrable" in this context means you can refer to its return value to keep a strict separation between timezone-aware and local date/time values as aforementioned. I'll commit this though as "related" is better understood by most users

strict separation between timezone-aware and "local" date/time values.

> EdgeDB store and output timezone-aware values in UTC format.

Reviewer: I might discard this change. It makes "EdgeDB" plural which we aren't doing consistently. I'm OK with "format" if you want to keep it, but equally I'm not sure it adds any clarity.

Author: "UTC" alone could imply the whole date/time style, whereas with certain types the UTC format might only apply to a time or date type.

Reviewer 2: Should be "stores". I can't parse it in the current form.

@raddevon EdgeDB should be singular, always.

.. note::

>     All date/time types are stricted to years between 1 and 999, including

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    All date/time types are restricted to years between 1 and 9999, including
```

>     their end points.

Reviewer: This reads a bit awkward to me: the endpoints belonging to `the years between 1 and 9999`. Feels a bit unnatural to state it this way.
```suggestion
    the years 1 and 9999.
```

>     Although many systems support the ISO8601 date/time formatting in theory,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Although many systems support the ISO 8601 date/time formatting in theory,
```

>     practical application of formatting in-between years 1 through 9999 tends

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    practical application of formatting of in-between years 1 through 9999 tends
```

>     practical application of formatting before year 1 and after 9999 tends to

Author: Totally missed this. @raddevon I propose we do this

```suggestion
    practical application of formatting in-between years 1 through 9999 tends to
```

.. eql:type:: std::datetime

    Represents a timezone-aware moment in time.

    All dates must correspond to dates that exist in the proleptic Gregorian
    calendar.

    :eql:op:`Casting <cast>` is a simple way to obtain a :eql:type:`datetime`
    value in an expression:

    .. code-block:: edgeql

        select <datetime>'2018-05-07T15:01:22.306916+00';
        select <datetime>'2018-05-07T15:01:22+00';

    When casting :eql:type:`datetime` from strings, the string must follow to

>     the ISO8601 format with a timezone included.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    the ISO 8601 format with a timezone included.
```

Please add a space between ISO and number in all instances. It's easier to read with the space.

        Hint: Please use ISO8601 format. Alternatively "to_datetime"
        function provides custom formatting options.

    All :eql:type:`datetime` values are restricted to a range of year 1 to
    9999.

    For more information regarding interacting with this type, see
    :eql:func:`datetime_get`, :eql:func:`to_datetime` and :eql:func:`to_str`.

----------

.. eql:type:: cal::local_datetime

    Represents a date and time without a given timezone.

    :eql:op:`Casting <cast>` is a simple way to obtain a value through an

>     expression:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime` value through an expression:
```
I do like "through an expression" vs. "in an expression though.

    .. code-block:: edgeql

        select <cal::local_datetime>'2018-05-07T15:01:22.306916';
        select <cal::local_datetime>'2018-05-07T15:01:22';

    When casting :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime` from strings, the string must

>     follow the ISO8601 format with a timezone included.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    follow the ISO8601 format with the timezone excluded:
```

The intent of the following example is to show that an ISO 8601 string cast to `local_datetime` that _does_ include a timezone will throw. Changing the text to reflect that and ending with a colon to indicate the example demonstrates the idea conveyed.

        "cal::to_local_datetime" function provides custom formatting
        options.

    All :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime` values are restricted to a range of
    year 1 to 9999.

    For more information regarding interacting with this type, see

>     :eql:func:`datetime_get`, :eql:func:`cal::to_local_datetime` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :eql:func:`datetime_get`, :eql:func:`cal::to_local_datetime`, and
```

Restoring the Oxford comma, just so we don't unintentionally introduce any ambiguity by applying it inconsistently. I recommend applying this globally to all series.

        select <cal::local_date>'2018-05-07';

    When casting :eql:type:`cal::local_date` from strings, the string must be
    in ISO8601 date format.

    For more information regarding interacting with this type, see

>     :eql:func:`datetime_get`, :eql:func:`cal::to_local_date` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :eql:func:`datetime_get`, :eql:func:`cal::to_local_date`, and
```

Reviewer: Just noticed that the function's referenced have changed here as well. Is that intentional? `cal::date_get` was changed to `datetime_get`. Since both of these can be called on a `cal::local_date`, maybe they should both be called out here?

What do you think, @vpetrovykh? Should the "For more information" paragraph be an exhaustive list of every function that can be applied to the data type, or is there a rationale for including a limited selection of those?

On the other hand, maybe since this page is exclusively about datetimes and related functions, we could just leave it as an exercise to the reader to reference those related functions by navigating the table at the top of the page.

    :eql:func:`to_str`.

----------

.. eql:type:: cal::local_time

>     Represents a time without a given timezone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A type for representing a time without a timezone.
```

        select <cal::local_time>'15:01:22.306916';
        select <cal::local_time>'15:01:22';

    When casting :eql:type:`cal::local_time` from strings, the string must be
    follow the ISO8601 format.

    For more information regarding interacting with this type, see

>     :eql:func:`datetime_get`, :eql:func:`cal::to_local_time` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :eql:func:`datetime_get`, :eql:func:`cal::to_local_time`, and
```

    :eql:func:`to_str`.

----------

.. _ref_datetime_duration:

.. eql:type:: std::duration

>     Represents a timespan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A type for representing a timespan.
```

    A :eql:type:`duration` is a fixed number of seconds and microseconds and

>     isn't adjusted by timezone, length of month or anything else in datetime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    isn't adjusted by timezone, length of month, or anything else in datetime
```

    calculations.

    When converting from a string, only units of ``'microseconds'``,
    ``'milliseconds'``, ``'seconds'``, ``'minutes'`` and ``'hours'`` are
    valid:

    .. code-block:: edgeql

        select <duration>'45.6 seconds';
        select <duration>'15 milliseconds';

>         select <duration>'48 hours 45 minutes';

Reviewer: Can we change this to a repl block so we can also show an example of attempting to cast a duration from an unsupported unit (like months) and show the error that raises? We would also then want to add the results of these valid casts.

        db> select <cal::local_time>'22:00' + <duration>'1 hour';
        {<cal::local_time>'23:00:00'}

    See functions :eql:func:`to_duration`, and :eql:func:`to_str` and
    date/time :eql:op:`operators <dtminus>` for more ways of working with
    :eql:type:`duration`.

    For more information regarding interacting with this type, see
    :eql:func:`to_duration`, :eql:func:`to_str` and
    :eql:op:`operators <dtminus>`.

----------

.. eql:type:: cal::relative_duration

>     Represents a timespan relative to a given unit of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A type for representing a timespan relative to a given point in time.
```

    Unlike :eql:type:`std::duration`, :eql:type:`cal::relative_duration`

>     is an inprecise form of measurement. Months, days and seconds are used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    is an imprecise form of measurement. When months and days are used, the same
    relative duration could have a different absolute duration depending on the
    date you're measuring from.
```

>     to declare the relation of the time's duration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     Note that the month specified share a correlation to their amount of days,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For example 2020 was a leap year and had 366 days. Notice how the number of
    hours in each year below is different:
```

The change is more difficult to read and parse. I prefer the more concrete style of the original here.

>     as how a leap year have 366 days. This behavior is noticable with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

        ...        <cal::relative_duration>'1 hour';
        {<cal::local_time>'23:00:00'}

    If an arithmetic operation results in a day that is nonexistent in the

>     given month, the last day of the month will be used instead:

Reviewer: Keep the "will be" and the colon but revert the rest. "doesn't exist" to "is nonexistent" doesn't add clarity or improve readability.

    .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

      db> select <cal::local_datetime>"2021-01-31T15:00:00" +
      ...        <cal::relative_duration>"1 month";
      {<cal::local_datetime>'2021-02-28T15:00:00'}

>     For arithmetic operations using :eql:type:`cal::relative_duration`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For arithmetic operations involving a :eql:type:`cal::relative_duration`
```

    consisting of multiple components (units), higher-order components are
    applied first, followed then by lower-order elements.

    .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

      db> select <cal::local_datetime>"2021-04-30T15:00:00" +
      ...        <cal::relative_duration>"1 month 1 day";
      {<cal::local_datetime>'2021-05-31T15:00:00'}

>     This behavior is different from adding up the same components separately

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you add the same components split into separate durations, adding the
```

The behavior here is the same if you add the split components from higher-order to lower-order. Also, reworded a bit to try to improve clarity.

>     with higher-order units first then followed by lower-order, producing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    higher-order units first followed by the lower-order units, the calculation
```

>     the same result as seen above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    produces the same result as in the previous example:
```

      ...        <cal::relative_duration>"1 day";
      {<cal::local_datetime>'2021-05-31T15:00:00'}

>     When the order of application is reversed, the resulting date/time may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When the order of operations is reversed, the result may be different under
```

>     produce a different result under some corner cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    some corner cases:
```

      ...        <cal::local_datetime>'2021-01-30T23:00:00' + m;
      {false}

    For more information regarding interacting with this type, see
    :eql:func:`cal::to_relative_duration`, :eql:func:`to_str` and
    :eql:op:`operators <dtminus>`.

----------

.. eql:type:: cal::date_duration

>     Represents a timespan of a date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A type for representing a timespan in days.
```

I don't think the rewrite is accurate. What's important here is that the granularity of the duration is limited.

    .. note::

      This type is only available in EdgeDB 2.0 or later.

    This type is similar to :eql:type:`cal::relative_duration`, except it only

>     uses 2 units: months and days. This is the result of subtracting one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    uses 2 units: months and days. It is the result of subtracting one
```

"This" sounds like it might refer to the type's use of only the two units instead of to the type itself. "It" here would more obviously refer to the type itself.

    :eql:type:`cal::local_date` from another. The purpose of this type is to

>     allow performing ``+`` and ``-`` operations on :eql:type:`cal::local_date`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    allow performing ``+`` and ``-`` operations on a :eql:type:`cal::local_date`
```

>     and produce :eql:type:`cal::local_date` as the result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    and to produce a :eql:type:`cal::local_date` as the result:
```

      {<cal::local_date>'2022-06-20'}

    When converting from a string, only the following units are valid:

    - ``'days'``
    - ``'weeks'``
    - ``'months'``
    - ``'years'``
    - ``'decades'``
    - ``'centuries'``
    - ``'millennia'``

>     **Units usage**

Reviewer: Saw one other instance of this earlier. This breaks with the style we've used to introduce examples throughout the standard library documentation (at least, the parts I've reviewed here; I have not gone through it comprehensively at this point). I would lean toward changing these to be more consistent.

```suggestion
    Units usage examples:
```

I would make this change globally to any similarly styled example introductions.

    .. code-block:: edgeql

        select <cal::date_duration>'45 days';
        select <cal::date_duration>'3 weeks 5 days';
        select <cal::date_duration>'-7 millennia';

    In most cases, :eql:type:`cal::date_duration` is fully compatible with
    :eql:type:`cal::relative_duration` and shares the same general

>     behavior/caveats. Implicit type coercion will happen in the event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    behavior and caveats. EdgeDB will apply type coercion in the event it
```

>     where only :eql:type:`cal::relative_duration` is expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    expects a :eql:type:`cal::relative_duration` and finds a
    :eql:type:`cal::date_duration` instead.
```

                              -> cal::local_datetime
                          cal::local_date + duration -> cal::local_datetime

>     Adds two variations of any date/time type into one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Adds any two datetime or duration values.
```

We're not adding the types here, but if I just remove the word "type" from the rewrite, it sounds as though you need two variations of the _same_ value to use the operator.

                           cal::relative_duration - duration\
                                -> cal::relative_duration

>     Subtracts two variations of any date/time type to one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Subtracts two compatible datetime or duration values.
```

>     This will also subtract the time interval and date/time of one another:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Examples:
```

        ...   <duration>'2 hours';
        {-3600s}

>     When subtracting a date/time object from a time interval, an exception

Reviewer: Let's restructure this section a bit. We can add a note block that introduces the idea that some combinations of values do not make sense to subtract from one another. Within that paragraph, we can individually introduce each incompatible combination followed by the REPL example showing the result of attempting that subtraction.

I would offer a proper GitHub suggestion here, but it's a bit of a nightmare trying to line everything up and edit line-by-line here in the comment box. Intro might be something like this:

> Subtraction doesn't make sense for some type combinations. You couldn't subtract a point in time from a duration, so neither can EdgeDB (although the inverse — subtracting a duration from a point in time — is perfectly fine). You also couldn't subtract a timezone-aware datetime from a local one or vice versa. If you attempt any of these, EdgeDB will raise an exception as shown in these examples:

The note about subtracting `local_date` values should be a separate note block (or at least separate _from_ the incompatible subtraction note block).

        {-3600s}

    When subtracting a :eql:type:`cal::local_date` type from another, the
    result is given as a whole number of days using the
    :eql:type:`cal::date_duration` type:

    .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

      db> select <cal::local_date>'2022-06-25' -
      ...   <cal::local_date>'2019-02-01';
      {<cal::date_duration>'P1240D'}

    .. note::

        Subtraction doesn't make sense for some type combinations. You couldn't
        subtract a point in time from a duration, so neither can EdgeDB
        (although the inverse — subtracting a duration from a point in time —
        is perfectly fine). You also couldn't subtract a timezone-aware
        datetime from a local one or vice versa. If you attempt any of these,
        EdgeDB will raise an exception as shown in these examples.

    When subtracting a date/time object from a time interval, an exception
    will be raised:

    .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

        db> select <duration>'1 day' -
        ...   <datetime>'2019-01-01T01:02:03+00';
        QueryError: operator '-' cannot be applied to operands ...

    An exception will also be raised when trying to subtract a timezone-aware

>     :eql:type:`std::datetime` type to or from :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime`:

Reviewer: "subtracting to" is a fairly uncommon construction, so I'll reword this so that we can avoid it while still conveying that idea.

>     :eql:type:`std::datetime` type to or from :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime`:

Reviewer: How about this?

```rest
    An exception will also be raised when trying to subtract a timezone-aware
    :eql:type:`std::datetime` type from :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime` or vice
    versa:
```

I also added another example reversing the order just so the examples are symmetrical with what we're saying in the sentence that introduces them. Examples code block now looks like this:

```rest
        db> select <datetime>'2019-01-01T01:02:03+00' -
        ...   <cal::local_datetime>'2019-02-01T01:02:03';
        QueryError: operator '-' cannot be applied to operands...
        db> select <cal::local_datetime>'2019-02-01T01:02:03' -
        ...   <datetime>'2019-01-01T01:02:03+00';
        QueryError: operator '-' cannot be applied to operands...
```

    :index: now

>     Returns the date and time of the start of a current transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns the date and time of the start of the current transaction.
```

                  std::datetime_get(dt: cal::local_datetime, \
                                    el: str) -> float64

>     Returns the element of a date/time type from the specified ``el``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns the element of a date/time given a unit name.
```

To mirror forthcoming changes to `duration_get` in #4655.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     Extract a specific element of input datetime by name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     Only the :eql:type:`datetime` type has the following elements available

Reviewer: I believe all of these units are available to use with either of data types supported by this function. Unless I'm mistaken:
```suggestion
    You may pass any of these unit names for *el*:
```

>     for extraction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

.. eql:function:: cal::time_get(dt: cal::local_time, el: str) -> float64

>     Returns the element of a :eql:type:`cal::local_time` type by a name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns the element of a :eql:type:`cal::local_time` given a unit name.
```

>     The :eql:type:`cal::local_time` scalar has the following elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You may pass any of these unit names for *el*:
```

>     available for extraction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

        ...     <cal::local_time>'15:01:22.306916', 'milliseconds');
        {22306.916}

    For more information regarding what these elements extract, see
    :eql:func:`datetime_get`.

----------

.. eql:function:: cal::date_get(dt: local_date, el: str) -> float64

>     Returns the element of a :eql:type:`cal::local_date` type by a name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns the element of a :eql:type:`cal::local_date` given a unit name.
```
